Once around the center of the universe.
So to talk about the center of the
universe, we perhaps should go back to
the ideas of Tommy and the ancient
Greeks and the geocentric model with the
earth in the center.
Around the earth moved the planets and
they included things like the moon and
the sun, anything that seemed to move
against the background of stars as a
wanderer, a planet. And
obviously the stars were mounted on the
outer of a set of crystal spheres fixed
relative to each other uh rotating
around the earth daily and the other
objects were able to move on their own
crystal spheres independently.
But the stars remain fixed relative to
each other and that was the whole of the
universe. But it begs the question, and
clearly I'm not the only person worried
about it. If that is the edge, the outer
crystal sphere of the fixed stars, what
lies beyond? And this guy here has poked
his head out through and is looking at
the clockwork mechanisms out beyond the
stars that are obviously part of the
mechanism driving the system around. A
really good question. What is there out
there? And is that the edge or does the
universe go on beyond that crystal
sphere? But really we should first try
to answer this question.
Is there an edge? Is the universe
infinite or finite? And the first person
to really point out something rather
obvious about all of this was. This is
on the right here and a picture of
stars. and he made a very simple
observation about the night sky which is
that it gets dark
at night. The sky is not as bright as it
is in daylight. We see lots of stars but
we do not see an infinite number of them
because if we did see an infinite number
they would cover the whole of the sky.
If the universe had been there forever,
was eternal, was infinitely large, and
didn't just contain a small pocket of
stars, including our own, somewhere
within it. If they were randomly
distributed across the entire extent,
there would be an infinite number of
stars and eventually all lines of sight
would go out from our eye and intersect
with the surface of a star. And so once
the light from those stars had had
enough time to arrive and if the
universe was eternal they and they'd
always been there then that would have
already happened then gradually the dark
sky would become a bright sky and in
fact it would have the temperature of
the surface of a star um and we would be
fried because of the enormous amount of
heat energy that that would uh bring
with it. So that can't be right. One of
these assumptions about being eternal or
being infinite must be wrong.
Now the next step in understanding this
problem really came from Einstein and
his general theory of relativity in 1915
where he explained gravity as the effect
of the curvature of the space and time
around us rather than a simple Newtonian
rectangular grid going in all directions
and a fixed master clock.
And this solves a number of what you
might call corner cases, including the
orbit of Mercury, which just doesn't
seem to fit with Newton's model. It's uh
just wrong enough that astronomers were
able to detect the difference. And
general relativity corrects that and
gets exactly the right answer as far as
we've been able to measure. So
Einstein's equations for the shape of
the whole universe now seem to explain
pretty much everything from the orbit of
Mercury to black holes to all sorts of
formation of galaxies and so on. There
are obviously some things we don't know
but it's uh do done well so far. It's
passed every detailed test we've thrown
at it.
A confidant of Einstein was this guy Gor
Lmetra, professor of physics, Catholic
priest at the same time. And he was one
of the people who solved Einstein's
original field equations for the whole
of the universe. And he showed something
very very important that the universe
could not just be sat stationary a
static unchanging universe.
Three other people also came up with the
same solution. Freriedman, Robertson,
and Walker. And we now call that
solution the LRW.
Taking the initials of Lmetra,
Freriedman, Robertson, and Walker to
describe this solution. And it shows
that the universe would either expand or
shrink. It could not be static. It would
be like trying to balance a pencil on
its tip. The slightest flap of a
butterflyy's wing would destabilize the
equilibrium and it would immediately
then start shrinking or expanding. A a
stable state would never be um a
stationary one.
And actually that was just before Hubble
came along with the discovery of the
expansion of the universe from the red
shift of the motion of galaxies away
from us being proportional to the
distance that they were from us. And so
we were able to determine that
everything was moving away from
everything else. The universe is
therefore expanding. And essentially, it
doesn't matter whether you think you're
in the middle or somebody else thinks in
the middle. They would all have the same
view. And you can see that in this nice
diagram on the right. If you look at the
blue galaxy in the left hand part of the
diagram, and then we let time run
forward, the universe expands. The blue
galaxy had a load of neighbors. and
they're all further away from it. But
that's also true for the green galaxy,
it's also true for the purple galaxy.
And in fact, the further away a galaxy
was from you, the more it has moved
away, so one that was one unit away is
now two, but one that was two units away
has moved four, and that is twice the
velocity. So it's uh moving faster the
further away it already was. And that's
true whichever galaxy you choose. So
nobody's special and therefore there's
nobody got the right to claim to be in
the center. So in such a universe that
went on um you would have a hard time
being able to pin down anywhere that was
the center of the universe.
Now obviously an expansion like that if
you run the clock backwards means that
it was smaller in the past and if you
keep on going back then we get to this
idea that it must have been the primeval
atom as postulated by Gor Lmetra and the
big bang as we would now call it being
the origin of everything in a hot dense
state expanding outwards. And so in some
ways the big bang is the center of the
universe. Um and everybody would think
they have all emerged from the center of
the universe cuz all lines of sight
trace back to the big bang.
You can't look in a direction that does
not go back there in fact due to that
curvature of space.
But you can only see the light that has
had time to reach you since the Big
Bang. You're limited to looking back in
time, the age of the universe, 13.8
billion years. No ray of light can have
reached you yet. If it started from a
point that was further away in space
than corresponds to a travel time of
13.8 billion years. So actually since
I've been talking the cosmic horizon
around me has got a little bigger and
photons of radiation that come from
further away are still arriving for the
first time. And when we look way back to
just before the big bang, we obviously
see the cosmic microwave background
radiation as some of the oldest and
longest traveled radiation in the
universe all around us in every
direction because the big bang appears
to be all around us when we look out
because our lines of sight are actually
all curving back through the expanding
universe. takes a little bit of getting
your mind around,
but this puts you at the center of your
observable universe. So although I've
ruled out the fact that anyone was at
the center, I'm now going to claim that
everyone is at their own center.
We've all got our own individual point
of view and our own cosmic horizon
around us.
Um, so if we have the Earth in the
center of our diagram here
and two other planets perhaps in distant
galaxies, one at point A and one at
point B,
and they are so far away that a photon
of light from A has just arrived at
Earth and another one from the other
direction has just arrived from B. We
can just see both A and B, but they
surely can't see each other because they
are outside each other's cosmic horizon,
and they will be for some considerable
time.
And so, you would argue that uh
everybody is seeing themselves in the
middle, but none of them can really be
in the middle because they've all got an
equal right to claim to be inside their
own cosmic horizon.
Now before we go on just a word about
dark matter. 1953 this guy Fritz Vicki
discovered that the coma cluster of
galaxies shown up in the top right hand
corner wasn't behaving itself. The
estimated mass of the um number of
galaxies based on the brightness that
you could see and count
did not fit the movement of the galaxies
that measured using the Doppler shift to
measure their relative velocity to each
other. They obviously all have an
overall Doppler shift because of the
expansion of the universe over the
distance between us. But you can measure
the individual galaxies and compare that
with the average for the entire cluster
and get their peculiar motion relative
to their uh
sister galaxies within the coma cluster
itself. And what he found was that they
were all moving too fast to be held
together by the amount of gravity that
was presumably present in the number of
galaxies that we could see and count and
estimate from their brightness. And so
the cluster should have been flying
apart and should have dissipated and uh
not really been there at all. In fact,
the difference was about a factor of 500
to one. This wasn't a small error. This
was in fact a very large amount of extra
stickiness holding the cluster together
was really the only explanation. And he
came up with the word donor matter, dark
matter to describe it. He hypothesized
that there must be some matter present
in this cluster of galaxies that we
can see the effect of its mass and
gravity but that we cannot see shining
by any form of electromagnetic
radiation.
And when we have studied the expansion
of the universe over time
and talked about it for many many years
since it was discovered,
we always were expecting that gravity
was be pulling the on the material
trying to slow down that expansion. And
we never knew whether there was enough
mass present in the universe to create a
a a scenario where
the expansion rate would go on forever
or whether it would slow down or perhaps
even reverse and fall back to a big
crunch at some point in the future. And
that uh graph on the right there is
trying to show it expressed using this
parameter omega. If omega is exactly
one, the universe would expand and just
carry on expanding forever. Um, and at
other values, it would collapse back
again perhaps in 23 billion years time.
Um, as shown by the orange hemisphere
curve at the bottom there.
And
that
the stronger the force of gravity, the
more likely that would be. weak gravity,
it was likely to just grow cold and dark
and spread out and keep on expanding
forever. But the real amazing result
that was measured back at the end of the
last century back in the 1990s going on
up to uh the the end of the century was
that the trajectory was more like the
red curve where it seems to be getting
faster and expanding away at an
everinccreasing rate. the so-called
accelerating universe. Um, and that just
didn't make any sense and it led to the
idea that there was an
anti-gravitational force acting which we
call dark energy. This uh was based on
the explosion of white dwarf stars, type
1A supernovi, way in the distant
universe that act as in theory standard
candles. they would all explode at the
same mass and therefore be equally
powerful. And so their brightness that
we observe gives us a way of estimating
their distance. And using that and
comparing the apparent size and
expansion rate of the universe over the
history of its expansion. So looking at
different epochs in time because the
further away you look, the more you're
looking back in time and you can plot
out the expansion history of the
universe. And it seemed to be suggesting
that anti-gravity
nature of an accelerating expansion
rate. uh this force or energy that was
propelling that anti-gravitational
effect was given the name dark energy
pushing the universe to expand faster
and faster forever.
Now
if we go back to that idea of the cosmic
horizon
obviously it's getting larger at with
time and so the spheres around us that
we can see become larger. The uh cosmic
distance limit is the age of the
universe as regards the travel time of
light. So since I've been talking, I am
receiving photons from further away. And
that would mean that perhaps we would
start to see a a larger and larger
universe. But you have to factor into
that the fact that if the universe is
expanding and it's expanding apparently
faster the further away you are, then we
have two competing effects. You have
your horizon growing at the speed of
light, but objects that are far enough
away will be carried away from you
faster than the speed of light. And so
eventually uh they will disappear and
you're um not going to be able to see
everything that was ever in the universe
at all. Slightly difficult to get your
head around. Um, and I've been very
careful in saying the light travel time
distance of 13.8 billion years of travel
because as the light has moved from its
origin towards you, the space that it's
already moved through has expanded
afterwards. And so the distance to the
horizon is not 13.8 billion light years.
It's actually expanded already since the
light set off. And so if you calculate
that uh equivalent distance, it's more
like 45 billion light years is the limit
of our visibility,
even though the light has only taken
13.8 billion years to travel through it
because it wasn't as big then as it is
now. Um, and that's uh a figure that's
sometimes uh very badly explained. Hope
I've done better.
And then we have dark flow. So if we are
an observer on earth and we are
observing the cosmic sphere of
visibility around us that goes out to
that cosmic time limit, distance limit.
That's as far away as we can see. We can
see all the objects in that zone and we
can see how they're moving under the
effect of the expansion of the universe
apparently being carried away from us.
But also any peculiar movement like
Fritzviki was discovering where clusters
of galaxies are all orbiting around
their common center of mass or moving
towards other clusters of galaxies.
Well, there's some evidence that we are
seeing
some [snorts] groups of galaxies moving
towards the horizon limit
by an amount that suggests that they are
being pulled towards
a very large mass that is actually
outside of our cosmic horizon. And this
is called dark flow. It's as if there is
a huge amount of mass that we cannot
see. But what we can observe is the
effect of its gravity on very distant
objects that we can see. They're inside
our horizon. The large mass, whatever it
is, is outside our horizon and it's
pulling on them because it's inside
their horizon. So, they're affected by
it, but we are not. And that's quite uh
bizarre. And we'll probably never be
able to find out what is going on.
Although in astronomy, I've learned you
should never say we will never know
because we constantly find new ways to
discover things.
So if we go back momentarily to the
FLRW, the Freriedman Lmetra Robertson
Walker solutions to the Einstein
equations and the whole idea of the
expanding universe and the shape of the
universe and whether it's open or
closed. We need to remember something
which is that it's based on the idea
that the universe is isotropic. It's the
same in every direction. It's uniformly
dense in every direction. They in order
to solve the equations had to assume
that the mass of the universe was
distributed like a thin smoke or a thin
gas across the whole of the universe and
equally dense everywhere, which is a
pretty good approximation because in
every direction we see more or less the
same distribution of matter. But
obviously it's not completely smooth. We
do see structure. We see galaxies. We
see clusters of galaxies. We see
features like the thin filaments and
walls of clusters of galaxies. And
between them the huge cosmic voids where
there is apparently nothing. And so
actually the real universe is more
complicated than the model used to solve
the equations in the FLRW case.
And we have to remember that it isn't
just space that is being bent by the
effect of the curvature of spacetime,
but that gravity affects time as well.
Clocks on the ground go slower than
those up a tower or on a plane or
orbiting the earth.
In fact, our GPS satellites that we use
every day for satnav, we have to allow
for the alteration of time between the
atomic clocks on the the satellites in
orbit. And that's really all they are is
just clocks with a radio sending out a
beacon of what they think the time is.
And we hear that on Earth and we know
where the satellites are supposed to be.
And from the flight time down to us of
the uh radio signals, we can triangulate
backwards and work out where on earth we
must be. But we have to allow for the
fact that uh the equations of general
relativity tell us that our clocks are
running slower here on Earth than the
clocks on the satellite. And if we
didn't do that, we'd be up to a
kilometer out when we next took a trip
to the supermarket.
So, a real proven effect.
And this leads us to the timecapes
hypothesis, which is what I wanted to
talk about. So back in 2007, David
Wilshire, professor of physics at the
University of Canterbury in New Zealand,
published a paper in the New Journal of
Physics.
And what it looked at was that the
cosmic voids pictured in the disc on the
left there are much less dense than the
material in the filaments, the clusters,
and the galaxies within them. And in
fact, a clock in empty space in those
voids will run as much as 38% faster
than a clock in the dense bits of the uh
world like inside the Milky Way galaxy.
And he reasoned that this could in fact
be making us
make wrong assumptions in using that
FLRW metric to calculate the behavior of
the universe on these truly grand
scales.
What he said was that a light beam
moving across the universe from a huge
distance will spend much of its
existence traversing through the voids
where its clock will run faster and it
will experience more time as it's
crossing those voids than it would do if
they were um more dense regions. And
then the clocks that we have are running
up to 38% slower than that.
And so he looked at that and then looked
at the type 1A supernova data from the
2024 study with well over a thousand
observations
and found that his idea of timecapes
taking into account this difference in
the rate of passage of time during the
journey of the light flash from these
supernovi to us.
has just enough effect to mean that you
do not need to have dark energy as an
explanation for the apparent results.
So perhaps there is no dark energy and
the universe is not accelerating.
That will be a very interesting result.
And I I give this paper a lot of
credence. So I think this might really
be on to something. And so maybe dark
energy will be consigned to the bin of
history as an interesting idea. But uh
the jury is still out on this one.
[clears throat and cough]
And another idea that I came across in
researching this talk and a very
interesting paper on the subject talking
about the fact that maybe one of the
mysteries in physics associated with the
expansion of the universe the so-called
Hubble tension could be explained if the
whole of the universe was actually
rotating.
Now that's very interesting indeed. The
rotation wouldn't need to be very fast
once every 500 billion years. And bear
in mind, our bit of the universe that we
can see is only 13.8 billion years old.
So this would be extremely slow and very
difficult to detect. But it could
explain why we are in fact getting
different readings for what we think the
expansion rate of the universe is now
and what we think it was by looking at
the microwave background radiation way
back towards the dawn of time. And from
those we can calculate the Hubble
constant and we get two different
answers. But maybe the rotation of the
universe factored into the equations of
general relativity can help explain this
one away. So maybe with a combination of
time scapes and this we can actually
make progress and solve some of these
really big questions in the whole of uh
cosmology. So, with that, thanks very
much for listening and I hope you've
enjoyed that uh rather mind-bending tour
of ideas about where we might find the
center of the universe, if indeed there
is one. Thanks for listening.